Title: Bayesian structural time series
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_structural_time_series
PageID: 50211107
Categories: Category:Bayesian statistics, Category:Machine learning, Category:Time series
Source: Wikipedia (CC BY-SA 4.0). Content may require attribution.

-----
Bayesian structural time series ( BSTS ) model is a statistical technique used for feature selection , time series forecasting, nowcasting , inferring causal impact and other applications. The model is designed to work with time series data.
The model has also promising application in the field of analytical marketing . In particular, it can be used in order to assess how much different marketing campaigns have contributed to the change in web search volumes, product sales, brand popularity and other relevant indicators. Difference-in-differences models and interrupted time series designs are alternatives to this approach. "In contrast to classical difference-in-differences schemes, state-space models make it possible to (i) infer the temporal evolution of attributable impact, (ii) incorporate empirical priors on the parameters in a fully Bayesian treatment, and (iii) flexibly accommodate multiple sources of variation, including the time-varying influence of contemporaneous covariates, i.e., synthetic controls."
General model description
The model consists of three main components:
Kalman filter . The technique for time series decomposition. In this step, a researcher can add different state variables: trend, seasonality, regression, and others.
Spike-and-slab method. In this step, the most important regression predictors are selected.
Bayesian model averaging . Combining the results and prediction calculation.
The model could be used to discover the causations with its counterfactual prediction and the observed data.
A possible drawback of the model can be its relatively complicated mathematical underpinning and difficult implementation as a computer program. However, the programming language R has ready-to-use packages for calculating the BSTS model, which do not require strong mathematical background from a researcher.
See also
Bayesian inference using Gibbs sampling
Correlation does not imply causation
Spike-and-slab regression
References
Further reading
Scott, S. L., & Varian, H. R. 2014a. Bayesian variable selection for nowcasting economic time series . Economic Analysis of the Digital Economy.
Scott, S. L., & Varian, H. R. 2014b. Predicting the present with bayesian structural time series . International Journal of Mathematical Modelling and Numerical Optimisation.
Varian, H. R. 2014. Big Data: New Tricks for Econometrics . Journal of Economic Perspectives
Brodersen, K. H., Gallusser, F., Koehler, J., Remy, N., & Scott, S. L. 2015. Inferring causal impact using Bayesian structural time-series models . The Annals of Applied Statistics.
R package "bsts" .
R package "CausalImpact" .
O’Hara, R. B., & Sillanpää, M. J. 2009. A review of Bayesian variable selection methods: what, how and which . Bayesian analysis.
Hoeting, J. A. , Madigan, D., Raftery, A. E., & Volinsky, C. T. 1999. Bayesian model averaging: a tutorial . Statistical science.
