Title: Human-in-the-loop
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human-in-the-loop
PageID: 22904524
Categories: Category:Ethics of science and technology, Category:Machine learning, Category:Military robots, Category:Military simulation, Category:Military technology, Category:Military terminology
Source: Wikipedia (CC BY-SA 4.0).

-----
Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Semi-supervised learning
Self-supervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Meta-learning
Online learning
Batch learning
Curriculum learning
Rule-based learning
Neuro-symbolic AI
Neuromorphic engineering
Quantum machine learning
Classification
Generative modeling
Regression
Clustering
Dimensionality reduction
Density estimation
Anomaly detection
Data cleaning
AutoML
Association rules
Semantic analysis
Structured prediction
Feature engineering
Feature learning
Learning to rank
Grammar induction
Ontology learning
Multimodal learning
Apprenticeship learning
Decision trees
Ensembles Bagging Boosting Random forest
Bagging
Boosting
Random forest
k -NN
Linear regression
Naive Bayes
Artificial neural networks
Logistic regression
Perceptron
Relevance vector machine (RVM)
Support vector machine (SVM)
BIRCH
CURE
Hierarchical
k -means
Fuzzy
Expectation–maximization (EM)
DBSCAN
OPTICS
Mean shift
Factor analysis
CCA
ICA
LDA
NMF
PCA
PGD
t-SNE
SDL
Graphical models Bayes net Conditional random field Hidden Markov
Bayes net
Conditional random field
Hidden Markov
RANSAC
k -NN
Local outlier factor
Isolation forest
Autoencoder
Deep learning
Feedforward neural network
Recurrent neural network LSTM GRU ESN reservoir computing
LSTM
GRU
ESN
reservoir computing
Boltzmann machine Restricted
Restricted
GAN
Diffusion model
SOM
Convolutional neural network U-Net LeNet AlexNet DeepDream
U-Net
LeNet
AlexNet
DeepDream
Neural field Neural radiance field Physics-informed neural networks
Neural radiance field
Physics-informed neural networks
Transformer Vision
Vision
Mamba
Spiking neural network
Memtransistor
Electrochemical RAM (ECRAM)
Q-learning
Policy gradient
SARSA
Temporal difference (TD)
Multi-agent Self-play
Self-play
Active learning
Crowdsourcing
Human-in-the-loop
Mechanistic interpretability
RLHF
Coefficient of determination
Confusion matrix
Learning curve
ROC curve
Kernel machines
Bias–variance tradeoff
Computational learning theory
Empirical risk minimization
Occam learning
PAC learning
Statistical learning
VC theory
Topological deep learning
AAAI
ECML PKDD
NeurIPS
ICML
ICLR
IJCAI
ML
JMLR
Glossary of artificial intelligence
List of datasets for machine-learning research List of datasets in computer vision and image processing
List of datasets in computer vision and image processing
Outline of machine learning
v
t
e
Human-in-the-loop ( HITL ) is used in multiple contexts. It can be defined as a model requiring human interaction. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] HITL is associated with modeling and simulation (M&S) in the live, virtual, and constructive taxonomy . HITL along with the related human- on -the-loop are also used in relation to lethal autonomous weapons . [ 3 ] Further, HITL is used in the context of machine learning . [ 4 ]
Machine learning
In machine learning, HITL is used in the sense of humans aiding the computer in making the correct decisions in building a model. [ 4 ] HITL improves machine learning over random sampling by selecting the most critical data needed to refine the model. [ 5 ]
Simulation
In simulation, HITL models may conform to human factors requirements as in the case of a mockup . In this type of simulation, a human is always part of the simulation and consequently influences the outcome in such a way that is difficult if not impossible to reproduce exactly. HITL also readily allows for the identification of problems and requirements that may not be easily identified by other means of simulation.
HITL is often referred to as interactive simulation, which is a special kind of physical simulation in which physical simulations include human operators, such as in a flight or a driving simulator .
Benefits
Human-in-the-loop allows the user to change the outcome of an event or process. The immersion effectively contributes to a positive transfer of acquired skills into the real world. This can be demonstrated by trainees utilizing flight simulators in preparation to become pilots.
HITL also allows for the acquisition of knowledge regarding how a new process may affect a particular event. Utilizing HITL allows participants to interact with realistic models and attempt to perform as they would in an actual scenario. HITL simulations bring to the surface issues that would not otherwise be apparent until after a new process has been deployed. A real-world example of HITL simulation as an evaluation tool is its usage by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to allow air traffic controllers to test new automation procedures by directing the activities of simulated air traffic while monitoring the effect of the newly implemented procedures. [ 6 ]
As with most processes, there is always the possibility of human error , which can only be reproduced using HITL simulation. Although much can be done to automate systems, humans typically still need to take the information provided by a system to determine the next course of action based on their judgment and experience. Intelligent systems can only go so far in certain circumstances to automate a process; only humans in the simulation can accurately judge the final design. Tabletop simulation may be useful in the very early stages of project development for the purpose of collecting data to set broad parameters, but the important decisions require human-in-the-loop simulation. [ 7 ]
Within virtual simulation taxonomy
Virtual simulations inject HITL in a central role by exercising motor control skills (e.g. flying an airplane), decision making skills (e.g. committing fire control resources to action), or communication skills (e.g. as members of a C4I team).
Examples
Flight simulators
Driving simulators
Marine simulators
Video games
Supply chain management simulators [ 8 ]
Digital puppetry
Misconceptions
Although human-in-the-loop simulation can include a computer simulation in the form of a synthetic environment, computer simulation is not necessarily a form of human-in-the-loop simulation, and is often considered as human-out-of-the loop simulation. In this particular case, a computer model’s behavior is modified according to a set of initial parameters. The results of the model differ from the results stemming from a true human-in-the-loop simulation because the results can easily be replicated time and time again, by simply providing identical parameters.
Weapons
Three classifications of the degree of human control of autonomous weapon systems were laid out by Bonnie Docherty in a 2012 Human Rights Watch report. [ 3 ]
human-in-the-loop : a human must instigate the action of the weapon (in other words not fully autonomous)
human-on-the-loop : a human may abort an action
human-out-of-the-loop : no human action is involved
See also
Humanistic intelligence , which is intelligence that arises by having the human in the feedback loop of the computational process [ 9 ]
Reinforcement learning from human feedback
MIM-104 Patriot - Examples of a human-on-the-loop lethal autonomous weapon system posing a threat to friendly forces.
References
