Title: Fine-tuning (deep learning)
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fine-tuning_(deep_learning)
PageID: 73250406
Categories: Category:Deep learning, Category:Machine learning
Source: Wikipedia (CC BY-SA 4.0). Content may require attribution.

-----
In deep learning , fine-tuning is an approach to transfer learning in which the parameters of a pre-trained neural network model are trained on new data. Fine-tuning can be done on the entire neural network, or on only a subset of its layers , in which case the layers that are not being fine-tuned are "frozen" (i.e., not changed during backpropagation ). A model may also be augmented with "adapters"—lightweight modules inserted into the model's architecture that nudge the embedding space for domain adaptation. These contain far fewer parameters than the original model and can be fine-tuned in a parameter-efficient way by tuning only their weights and leaving the rest of the model's weights frozen.
For some architectures, such as convolutional neural networks , it is common to keep the earlier layers (those closest to the input layer) frozen, as they capture lower-level features , while later layers often discern high-level features that can be more related to the task that the model is trained on.
Models that are pre-trained on large, general corpora are usually fine-tuned by reusing their parameters as a starting point and adding a task-specific layer trained from scratch. Fine-tuning the full model is also common and often yields better results, but is more computationally expensive.
Fine-tuning is typically accomplished via supervised learning , but there are also techniques to fine-tune a model using weak supervision . Fine-tuning can be combined with a reinforcement learning from human feedback -based objective to produce language models such as ChatGPT (a fine-tuned version of GPT models ) and Sparrow .
Robustness
Fine-tuning can degrade a model's robustness to distribution shifts . One mitigation is to linearly interpolate a fine-tuned model's weights with the weights of the original model, which can greatly increase out-of-distribution performance while largely retaining the in-distribution performance of the fine-tuned model.
Variants
Low-rank adaptation
Low-rank adaptation (LoRA) is an adapter-based technique for efficiently fine-tuning models. The basic idea is to design a low- rank matrix that is then added to the original matrix. An adapter, in this context, is a collection of low-rank matrices which, when added to a base model, produces a fine-tuned model. It allows for performance that approaches full-model fine-tuning with lower space requirements. A language model with billions of parameters may be LoRA fine-tuned with only several millions of parameters.
LoRA-based fine-tuning has become popular in the Stable Diffusion community. Support for LoRA was integrated into the diffusers library from Hugging Face . Support for LoRA and similar techniques is also available for a wide range of other models through Hugging Face's parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) package.
Representation fine-tuning
Representation fine-tuning (ReFT) is a technique developed by researchers at Stanford University aimed at fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) by modifying less than 1% of their representations. Unlike parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, which mainly focus on updating weights, ReFT targets representations, suggesting that modifying representations might be a more effective strategy than updating weights.
ReFT methods operate on a frozen base model and learn task-specific interventions on hidden representations and train interventions that manipulate a small fraction of model representations to steer model behaviors towards solving downstream tasks at inference time. One specific method within the ReFT family is low-rank linear subspace ReFT (LoReFT) , which intervenes on hidden representations in the linear subspace spanned by a low-rank projection matrix. LoReFT can be seen as the representation-based equivalent of low-rank adaptation (LoRA).
Applications
Natural language processing
Fine-tuning is common in natural language processing (NLP), especially in the domain of language modeling . Large language models like OpenAI 's series of GPT foundation models can be fine-tuned on data for specific downstream NLP tasks (tasks that use a pre-trained model) to improve performance over the unmodified pre-trained model.
Commercial models
Commercially-offered large language models can sometimes be fine-tuned if the provider offers a fine-tuning API. As of June 19, 2023, language model fine-tuning APIs are offered by OpenAI and Microsoft Azure 's Azure OpenAI Service for a subset of their models, as well as by Google Cloud Platform for some of their PaLM models, and by others.
See also
Catastrophic forgetting
Continual learning
Domain adaptation
Foundation model
Hyperparameter optimization
Overfitting
References
v
t
e
Autoencoder
Deep learning
Fine-tuning
Foundation model
Generative adversarial network
Generative pre-trained transformer
Large language model
Model Context Protocol
Neural network
Prompt engineering
Reinforcement learning from human feedback
Retrieval-augmented generation
Self-supervised learning
Stochastic parrot
Synthetic data
Top-p sampling
Transformer
Variational autoencoder
Vibe coding
Vision transformer
Waluigi effect
Word embedding
Character.ai
ChatGPT
DeepSeek
Ernie
Gemini
Grok
Copilot
Claude
Gemini
Gemma
GPT 1 2 3 J 4 4o 4.5 4.1 OSS 5
1
2
3
J
4
4o
4.5
4.1
OSS
5
Llama
o1
o3
o4-mini
Qwen
Base44
Claude Code
Cursor
Devstral
GitHub Copilot
Kimi-Dev
Qwen3-Coder
Replit
Xcode
Aurora
Firefly
Flux
GPT Image 1
Ideogram
Imagen
Midjourney
Qwen-Image
Recraft
Seedream
Stable Diffusion
Dream Machine
Hailuo AI
Kling
Midjourney Video
Runway Gen
Seedance
Sora
Veo
Wan
15.ai
Eleven
MiniMax Speech 2.5
WaveNet
Eleven Music
Endel
Lyria
Riffusion
Suno AI
Udio
Agentforce
AutoGLM
AutoGPT
ChatGPT Agent
Devin AI
Manus
OpenAI Codex
Operator
Replit Agent
01.AI
Aleph Alpha
Anthropic
Baichuan
Canva
Cognition AI
Cohere
Contextual AI
DeepSeek
ElevenLabs
Google DeepMind
HeyGen
Hugging Face
Inflection AI
Krikey AI
Kuaishou
Luma Labs
Meta AI
MiniMax
Mistral AI
Moonshot AI
OpenAI
Perplexity AI
Runway
Safe Superintelligence
Salesforce
Scale AI
SoundHound
Stability AI
Synthesia
Thinking Machines Lab
Upstage
xAI
Z.ai
Category
