Title: Automated machine learning
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_machine_learning
PageID: 55843837
Categories: Category:Artificial intelligence, Category:Computational neuroscience, Category:Machine learning
Source: Wikipedia (CC BY-SA 4.0). Content may require attribution.

-----
Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Semi-supervised learning
Self-supervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Meta-learning
Online learning
Batch learning
Curriculum learning
Rule-based learning
Neuro-symbolic AI
Neuromorphic engineering
Quantum machine learning
Classification
Generative modeling
Regression
Clustering
Dimensionality reduction
Density estimation
Anomaly detection
Data cleaning
AutoML
Association rules
Semantic analysis
Structured prediction
Feature engineering
Feature learning
Learning to rank
Grammar induction
Ontology learning
Multimodal learning
Apprenticeship learning
Decision trees
Ensembles Bagging Boosting Random forest
Bagging
Boosting
Random forest
k -NN
Linear regression
Naive Bayes
Artificial neural networks
Logistic regression
Perceptron
Relevance vector machine (RVM)
Support vector machine (SVM)
BIRCH
CURE
Hierarchical
k -means
Fuzzy
Expectation–maximization (EM)
DBSCAN
OPTICS
Mean shift
Factor analysis
CCA
ICA
LDA
NMF
PCA
PGD
t-SNE
SDL
Graphical models Bayes net Conditional random field Hidden Markov
Bayes net
Conditional random field
Hidden Markov
RANSAC
k -NN
Local outlier factor
Isolation forest
Autoencoder
Deep learning
Feedforward neural network
Recurrent neural network LSTM GRU ESN reservoir computing
LSTM
GRU
ESN
reservoir computing
Boltzmann machine Restricted
Restricted
GAN
Diffusion model
SOM
Convolutional neural network U-Net LeNet AlexNet DeepDream
U-Net
LeNet
AlexNet
DeepDream
Neural field Neural radiance field Physics-informed neural networks
Neural radiance field
Physics-informed neural networks
Transformer Vision
Vision
Mamba
Spiking neural network
Memtransistor
Electrochemical RAM (ECRAM)
Q-learning
Policy gradient
SARSA
Temporal difference (TD)
Multi-agent Self-play
Self-play
Active learning
Crowdsourcing
Human-in-the-loop
Mechanistic interpretability
RLHF
Coefficient of determination
Confusion matrix
Learning curve
ROC curve
Kernel machines
Bias–variance tradeoff
Computational learning theory
Empirical risk minimization
Occam learning
PAC learning
Statistical learning
VC theory
Topological deep learning
AAAI
ECML PKDD
NeurIPS
ICML
ICLR
IJCAI
ML
JMLR
Glossary of artificial intelligence
List of datasets for machine-learning research List of datasets in computer vision and image processing
List of datasets in computer vision and image processing
Outline of machine learning
v
t
e
Automated machine learning ( AutoML ) is the process of automating the tasks of applying machine learning to real-world problems. It is the combination of automation and ML.
AutoML potentially includes every stage from beginning with a raw dataset to building a machine learning model ready for deployment. AutoML was proposed as an artificial intelligence -based solution to the growing challenge of applying machine learning. The high degree of automation in AutoML aims to allow non-experts to make use of machine learning models and techniques without requiring them to become experts in machine learning. Automating the process of applying machine learning end-to-end additionally offers the advantages of producing simpler solutions, faster creation of those solutions, and models that often outperform hand-designed models.
Common techniques used in AutoML include hyperparameter optimization , meta-learning and neural architecture search .
Comparison to the standard approach
In a typical machine learning application, practitioners have a set of input data points to be used for training. The raw data may not be in a form that all algorithms can be applied to. To make the data amenable for machine learning, an expert may have to apply appropriate data pre-processing , feature engineering , feature extraction , and feature selection methods. After these steps, practitioners must then perform algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization to maximize the predictive performance of their model. If deep learning is used, the architecture of the neural network must also be chosen manually by the machine learning expert.
Each of these steps may be challenging, resulting in significant hurdles to using machine learning. AutoML aims to simplify these steps for non-experts, and to make it easier for them to use machine learning techniques correctly and effectively.
AutoML plays an important role within the broader approach of automating data science , which also includes challenging tasks such as data engineering, data exploration and model interpretation and prediction.
Targets of automation
Automated machine learning can target various stages of the machine learning process. Steps to automate are:
Data preparation and ingestion (from raw data and miscellaneous formats) Column type detection; e.g., Boolean, discrete numerical, continuous numerical, or text Column intent detection; e.g., target/label, stratification field, numerical feature, categorical text feature, or free text feature Task detection; e.g., binary classification , regression , clustering , or ranking
Column type detection; e.g., Boolean, discrete numerical, continuous numerical, or text
Column intent detection; e.g., target/label, stratification field, numerical feature, categorical text feature, or free text feature
Task detection; e.g., binary classification , regression , clustering , or ranking
Feature engineering Feature selection Feature extraction Meta-learning and transfer learning Detection and handling of skewed data and/or missing values
Feature selection
Feature extraction
Meta-learning and transfer learning
Detection and handling of skewed data and/or missing values
Model selection - choosing which machine learning algorithm to use, often including multiple competing software implementations
Ensembling - a form of consensus where using multiple models often gives better results than any single model
Hyperparameter optimization of the learning algorithm and featurization Neural architecture search
Neural architecture search
Pipeline selection under time, memory, and complexity constraints
Selection of evaluation metrics and validation procedures
Problem checking Leakage detection Misconfiguration detection
Leakage detection
Misconfiguration detection
Analysis of obtained results
Creating user interfaces and visualizations
Challenges and Limitations
There are a number of key challenges being tackled around automated machine learning. A big issue surrounding the field is referred to as "development as a cottage industry". This phrase refers to the issue in machine learning where development relies on manual decisions and biases of experts. This is contrasted to the goal of machine learning which is to create systems that can learn and improve from their own usage and analysis of the data. Basically, it's the struggle between how much experts should get involved in the learning of the systems versus how much freedom they should be giving the machines. However, experts and developers must help create and guide these machines to prepare them for their own learning. To create this system, it requires labor intensive work with knowledge of machine learning algorithms and system design .
Additionally, other challenges include meta-learning and computational resource allocation.
See also
Artificial intelligence
Artificial intelligence and elections
Neural architecture search
Neuroevolution
Self-tuning
Neural Network Intelligence
ModelOps
Hyperparameter optimization
References
Further reading
"Open Source AutoML Tools: AutoGluon, TransmogrifAI, Auto-sklearn, and NNI" . Bizety . 2020-06-16.
Ferreira, Luís, et al. "A comparison of AutoML tools for machine learning, deep learning and XGBoost." 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2021. https://repositorium.sdum.uminho.pt/bitstream/1822/74125/1/automl_ijcnn.pdf
Feurer, M., Klein, A., Eggensperger, K., Springenberg, J., Blum, M., & Hutter, F. (2015). Efficient and robust automated machine learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 28 . https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2015/file/11d0e6287202fced83f79975ec59a3a6-Paper.pdf
v
t
e
Differentiable programming
Information geometry
Statistical manifold
Automatic differentiation
Neuromorphic computing
Pattern recognition
Ricci calculus
Computational learning theory
Inductive bias
IPU
TPU
VPU
Memristor
SpiNNaker
TensorFlow
PyTorch
Keras
scikit-learn
Theano
JAX
Flux.jl
MindSpore
Portals Computer programming Technology
Computer programming
Technology
