Title: Midjourney
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Midjourney
PageID: 71151961
Categories: Category:2022 in artificial intelligence, Category:2022 software, Category:Art controversies, Category:Artificial intelligence art, Category:Deep learning software applications, Category:Discord bots, Category:Generative artificial intelligence, Category:Text-to-image generation, Category:Unsupervised learning, Category:Works involved in plagiarism controversies
Source: Wikipedia (CC BY-SA 4.0).

-----
Artificial general intelligence
Intelligent agent
Recursive self-improvement
Planning
Computer vision
General game playing
Knowledge representation
Natural language processing
Robotics
AI safety
Machine learning
Symbolic
Deep learning
Bayesian networks
Evolutionary algorithms
Hybrid intelligent systems
Systems integration
Open-source
Bioinformatics
Deepfake
Earth sciences
Finance
Generative AI Art Audio Music
Art
Audio
Music
Government
Healthcare Mental health
Mental health
Industry
Software development
Translation
Military
Physics
Projects
AI alignment
Artificial consciousness
The bitter lesson
Chinese room
Friendly AI
Ethics
Existential risk
Turing test
Uncanny valley
Timeline
Progress
AI winter
AI boom
AI bubble
Glossary
v
t
e
Midjourney is a generative artificial intelligence program and service created and hosted by the San Francisco -based independent research lab Midjourney, Inc. Midjourney generates images from natural language descriptions , called prompts , similar to OpenAI 's DALL-E and Stability AI 's Stable Diffusion . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is one of the technologies of the AI boom .
The tool was in open beta as of August 2024, which it entered on July 12, 2022. [ 3 ] The Midjourney team is led by David Holz, who co-founded Leap Motion . [ 4 ] Holz told The Register in August 2022 that the company was already profitable. [ 5 ] Users create artwork with Midjourney using Discord bot commands or the official website. [ 6 ] [ 7 ]
History
Midjourney, Inc. was founded in San Francisco, California , by David Holz, [ 8 ] previously a co-founder of Leap Motion . [ 9 ] The Midjourney image generation platform entered open beta on July 12, 2022. [ 3 ] On March 14, 2022, the Midjourney Discord server launched with a request to post high-quality photographs to Twitter and Reddit for systems training. [ citation needed ]
Model versions
The company has been working on improving its algorithms, releasing new model versions every few months. Version 2 of their algorithm was launched in April 2022, [ 10 ] and version 3 on July 25. [ 11 ] On November 5, 2022, the alpha iteration of version 4 was released to users. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Starting from the 4th version, MJ models were trained on Google TPUs . [ 14 ]
On March 15, 2023, the alpha iteration of version 5 was released. [ 15 ] The 5.1 model is more opinionated than version 5, applying more of its own stylization to images, while the 5.1 RAW model adds improvements while working better with more literal prompts. The version 5.2 included a new "aesthetics system", and the ability to "zoom out" by generating surroundings to an existing image. [ 16 ] On December 21, 2023, the alpha iteration of version 6 was released. The model was trained from scratch over a nine month period. Support was added for better text rendition and a more literal interpretation of prompts.
Functionality
Midjourney is accessible through a Discord bot or by accessing their website. Users can use Midjourney through Discord either through their official Discord server, by directly messaging the bot, or by inviting the bot to a third-party server. To generate images, users use the /imagine command and type in a prompt; [ 25 ] the bot then returns a set of four images, which users are given the option to upscale . To generate images on the website, users initially needed to have generated at least 1,000 images through the bot; this limitation has since been removed.
Vary (Region) + remix feature
Midjourney released a Vary (Region) feature on September 5, 2023, as part of MidJourney V5.2. This feature allows users to select a specific area of an image and apply variations only to that region while keeping the rest of the image unchanged. [ 26 ]
Midjourney web interface
Midjourney introduced its web interface to make its tools more accessible, moving beyond its initial reliance on Discord. This web-based platform was launched in August 2024 alongside the release of Midjourney version 6.1. The web editor consolidates tools such as image editing, panning, zooming, region variation, and inpainting into a single interface. [ 27 ] [ 28 ]
The introduction of the web interface also syncs conversations between Midjourney's Discord channels and web rooms, further enhancing collaboration across both platforms. This shift was in response to growing competition from other AI image generation platforms like Adobe Firefly and Google’s Imagen, which had already launched as native web apps with integration into popular design tools. [ 29 ]
Image Weight
This feature lets users control how much influence an uploaded image has on the final output. By adjusting the "image weight" parameter, users can prioritize either the content of the prompt or the characteristics of the image. For instance, setting a higher weight will ensure that the generated result closely follows the image's structure and details, while a lower weight allows the text prompt to have more influence over the final output. [ 30 ]
Style Reference
With Style Reference, users can upload an image to use as a stylistic guide for their creation. This tool enables MidJourney to extract the style—whether it is the color palette, texture, or overall atmosphere—from the reference image and apply it to a newly generated image. The feature allows users to fine-tune the aesthetics of their creations by integrating specific artistic styles or moods. [ 31 ]
Character Reference
The Character Reference feature allows for a more targeted approach in defining characters. Users can upload an image of a character, and the system uses that image as a reference to generate similar characters in the output. This feature is particularly useful in maintaining consistency in appearance for characters across different images. [ 32 ]
Uses
Midjourney's founder, David Holz, told The Register that artists use Midjourney for rapid prototyping of artistic concepts to show to clients before starting work themselves. [ 5 ]
The advertising industry has been quick to embrace AI tools such as Midjourney, DALL-E, and Stable Diffusion, among others. The tools that enable advertisers to create original content and brainstorm ideas quickly are providing new opportunities, such as "custom ads created for individuals, a new way to create special effects, or even making e-commerce advertising more efficient", according to Ad Age . [ 33 ] [ promotion? ]
Architects have described using the software to generate mood boards for the early stages of projects, as an alternative to searching Google Images . [ 34 ]
Notable usage and controversy
The program was used by the British magazine The Economist to create the front cover for an issue in June 2022. [ 36 ] [ 37 ] In Italy, the leading newspaper Corriere della Sera published a comic created with Midjourney by writer Vanni Santoni in August 2022. [ 38 ] Charlie Warzel used Midjourney to generate two images of Alex Jones for Warzel's newsletter in The Atlantic . The use of an AI-generated cover was criticised by people who felt it was taking jobs from artists. Warzel called his action a mistake in an article about his decision to use generated images. [ 39 ] Last Week Tonight with John Oliver included a 10-minute segment on Midjourney in an episode broadcast in August 2022. [ 40 ] [ 41 ]
A Midjourney image called Théâtre D'opéra Spatial won first place in the digital art competition at the 2022 Colorado State Fair . Jason Allen, who wrote the prompt that led Midjourney to generate the image, printed the image onto a canvas and entered it into the competition using the name Jason M. Allen via Midjourney. Other digital artists were upset by the news. [ 42 ] Allen was unapologetic, insisting that he followed the competition's rules. The two category judges were unaware that Midjourney used AI to generate images, although they later said that had they known this, they would have awarded Allen the top prize anyway. [ 43 ]
In December 2022, Midjourney was used to generate the images for an AI-generated children's book that was created over a weekend. Titled Alice and Sparkle , the book features a young girl who builds a robot that becomes self-aware. The creator, Ammaar Reeshi, used Midjourney to generate a large number of images, from which he chose 13 for the book. [ 44 ] Both the product and process drew criticism. One artist wrote that "the main problem... is that it was trained off of artists' work. It's our creations, our distinct styles that we created, that we did not consent to being used." [ 35 ]
In 2023, the realism of AI-based text-to-image generators, such as Midjourney, DALL-E , or Stable Diffusion , [ 45 ] [ 46 ] reached such a high level that it led to a significant wave of viral AI-generated photos. Widespread attention was gained by a Midjourney-generated photo of Pope Francis wearing a white puffer coat, [ 47 ] [ 48 ] the fictional arrest of Donald Trump , [ 49 ] and a hoax of an attack on the Pentagon , [ 50 ] as well as the usage in professional creative arts. [ 51 ] [ 52 ]
Research has suggested that the images Midjourney generates can be biased. For example, even neutral prompts in one study returned unequal results on the aspects of gender, skin color, and location. [ 53 ] A study by researchers at the nonprofit group Center for Countering Digital Hate found the tool to be easy to use to generate racist and conspiratorial images. [ 54 ] In October 2023, Rest of World reported that Midjourney tends to generate images based on national stereotypes . [ 55 ]
In 2024, a Frontiers journal published a paper [ 58 ] which contained gibberish figures generated with Midjourney, one of which was a diagram of a rat with large testicles and a large penis towering over himself. The paper was retracted a day after the images went viral on Twitter. [ 57 ]
Content moderation and censorship in Midjourney
Prior to May 2023, Midjourney implemented a moderation mechanism predicated on a banned word system. This method prohibited the use of language associated with explicit content, such as sexual or pornographic themes, as well as extreme violence. Moreover, the system also banned certain individual words, including those of religious and political figures, such as Allah or General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping . This practice occasionally stirred controversy due to perceived instances of censorship within the Midjourney platform. [ 59 ] [ 60 ]
Commencing in May 2023, with subsequent updates post version 5, Midjourney transitioned to an AI-powered content moderation system. This advanced mechanism allowed for a more nuanced interpretation of user prompts by analyzing them in their entirety. It consequently facilitated the context-dependent use of words that had previously been prohibited. For instance, users can now prompt the AI to generate a portrait of Xi Jinping. At the same time, the system will prevent the generation of contentious images, such as depictions of global leaders, including Xi Jinping, in situations of arrest. [ 61 ]
Litigation
On January 13, 2023, three artists— Sarah Andersen , Kelly McKernan , and Karla Ortiz—filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against Stability AI , Midjourney, and DeviantArt , claiming that these companies have infringed on the rights of millions of artists by training AI tools on five billion images scraped from the web, without the consent of the original artists. [ 62 ]
The legal action was initiated in San Francisco by attorney Matthew Butterick in partnership with the Joseph Saveri Law Firm, the same team challenging Microsoft , GitHub , and OpenAI (developers of ChatGPT and DALL-E ) in court. In July 2023, U.S. District Judge William Orrick inclined to dismiss most of the lawsuit filed by Andersen, McKernan, and Ortiz but allowed them to file a new complaint. [ 63 ] Another lawsuit was filed in November 2023 against Midjourney, Stability AI, DeviantArt and Runway AI for using the copyrighted work of over 4,700 artists. [ 64 ]
On June 11, 2025, Universal Pictures (owned by Comcast ) and The Walt Disney Company filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against Midjourney. [ 65 ] The suit described Midjourney as "a bottomless pit of plagiarism." [ 65 ]
On September 4, 2025, Warner Bros. Discovery filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against Midjourney, claiming the company is engaged in the "theft" of its intellectual property, which includes characters like Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman , Tweety , and Scooby-Doo . [ 66 ] The suit also claims that the generative AI program "has made a calculated and profit-driven decision to offer zero protection for copyright owners even though Midjourney knows about the breathtaking scope of its piracy and copyright infringement."
See also
Artificial intelligence art
Computer art
Generative art
DALL-E
Imagen
Stable Diffusion
References
External links
Official website
v
t
e
Autoencoder
Deep learning
Fine-tuning
Foundation model
Generative adversarial network
Generative pre-trained transformer
Large language model
Model Context Protocol
Neural network
Prompt engineering
Reinforcement learning from human feedback
Retrieval-augmented generation
Self-supervised learning
Stochastic parrot
Synthetic data
Top-p sampling
Transformer
Variational autoencoder
Vibe coding
Vision transformer
Waluigi effect
Word embedding
Character.ai
ChatGPT
DeepSeek
Ernie
Gemini
Grok
Copilot
Claude
Gemini
Gemma
GPT 1 2 3 J 4 4o 4.5 4.1 OSS 5
1
2
3
J
4
4o
4.5
4.1
OSS
5
Llama
o1
o3
o4-mini
Qwen
Base44
Claude Code
Cursor
Devstral
GitHub Copilot
Kimi-Dev
Qwen3-Coder
Replit
Xcode
Aurora
Firefly
Flux
GPT Image 1
Ideogram
Imagen
Midjourney
Qwen-Image
Recraft
Seedream
Stable Diffusion
Dream Machine
Hailuo AI
Kling
Midjourney Video
Runway Gen
Seedance
Sora
Veo
Wan
15.ai
Eleven
MiniMax Speech 2.5
WaveNet
Eleven Music
Endel
Lyria
Riffusion
Suno AI
Udio
Agentforce
AutoGLM
AutoGPT
ChatGPT Agent
Devin AI
Manus
OpenAI Codex
Operator
Replit Agent
01.AI
Aleph Alpha
Anthropic
Baichuan
Canva
Cognition AI
Cohere
Contextual AI
DeepSeek
ElevenLabs
Google DeepMind
HeyGen
Hugging Face
Inflection AI
Krikey AI
Kuaishou
Luma Labs
Meta AI
MiniMax
Mistral AI
Moonshot AI
OpenAI
Perplexity AI
Runway
Safe Superintelligence
Salesforce
Scale AI
SoundHound
Stability AI
Synthesia
Thinking Machines Lab
Upstage
xAI
Z.ai
Category
v
t
e
History timeline
timeline
Companies
Projects
Parameter Hyperparameter
Hyperparameter
Loss functions
Regression Bias–variance tradeoff Double descent Overfitting
Bias–variance tradeoff
Double descent
Overfitting
Clustering
Gradient descent SGD Quasi-Newton method Conjugate gradient method
SGD
Quasi-Newton method
Conjugate gradient method
Backpropagation
Attention
Convolution
Normalization Batchnorm
Batchnorm
Activation Softmax Sigmoid Rectifier
Softmax
Sigmoid
Rectifier
Gating
Weight initialization
Regularization
Datasets Augmentation
Augmentation
Prompt engineering
Reinforcement learning Q-learning SARSA Imitation Policy gradient
Q-learning
SARSA
Imitation
Policy gradient
Diffusion
Latent diffusion model
Autoregression
Adversary
RAG
Uncanny valley
RLHF
Self-supervised learning
Reflection
Recursive self-improvement
Hallucination
Word embedding
Vibe coding
Machine learning In-context learning
In-context learning
Artificial neural network Deep learning
Deep learning
Language model Large language model NMT
Large language model
NMT
Reasoning language model
Model Context Protocol
Intelligent agent
Artificial human companion
Humanity's Last Exam
Artificial general intelligence (AGI)
AlexNet
WaveNet
Human image synthesis
HWR
OCR
Computer vision
Speech synthesis 15.ai ElevenLabs
15.ai
ElevenLabs
Speech recognition Whisper
Whisper
Facial recognition
AlphaFold
Text-to-image models Aurora DALL-E Firefly Flux Ideogram Imagen Midjourney Recraft Stable Diffusion
Aurora
DALL-E
Firefly
Flux
Ideogram
Imagen
Midjourney
Recraft
Stable Diffusion
Text-to-video models Dream Machine Runway Gen Hailuo AI Kling Sora Veo
Dream Machine
Runway Gen
Hailuo AI
Kling
Sora
Veo
Music generation Riffusion Suno AI Udio
Riffusion
Suno AI
Udio
Word2vec
Seq2seq
GloVe
BERT
T5
Llama
Chinchilla AI
PaLM
GPT 1 2 3 J ChatGPT 4 4o o1 o3 4.5 4.1 o4-mini 5
1
2
3
J
ChatGPT
4
4o
o1
o3
4.5
4.1
o4-mini
5
Claude
Gemini Gemini (language model) Gemma
Gemini (language model)
Gemma
Grok
LaMDA
BLOOM
DBRX
Project Debater
IBM Watson
IBM Watsonx
Granite
PanGu-Σ
DeepSeek
Qwen
AlphaGo
AlphaZero
OpenAI Five
Self-driving car
MuZero
Action selection AutoGPT
AutoGPT
Robot control
Alan Turing
Warren Sturgis McCulloch
Walter Pitts
John von Neumann
Claude Shannon
Shun'ichi Amari
Kunihiko Fukushima
Takeo Kanade
Marvin Minsky
John McCarthy
Nathaniel Rochester
Allen Newell
Cliff Shaw
Herbert A. Simon
Oliver Selfridge
Frank Rosenblatt
Bernard Widrow
Joseph Weizenbaum
Seymour Papert
Seppo Linnainmaa
Paul Werbos
Geoffrey Hinton
John Hopfield
Jürgen Schmidhuber
Yann LeCun
Yoshua Bengio
Lotfi A. Zadeh
Stephen Grossberg
Alex Graves
James Goodnight
Andrew Ng
Fei-Fei Li
Alex Krizhevsky
Ilya Sutskever
Oriol Vinyals
Quoc V. Le
Ian Goodfellow
Demis Hassabis
David Silver
Andrej Karpathy
Ashish Vaswani
Noam Shazeer
Aidan Gomez
John Schulman
Mustafa Suleyman
Jan Leike
Daniel Kokotajlo
François Chollet
Neural Turing machine
Differentiable neural computer
Transformer Vision transformer (ViT)
Vision transformer (ViT)
Recurrent neural network (RNN)
Long short-term memory (LSTM)
Gated recurrent unit (GRU)
Echo state network
Multilayer perceptron (MLP)
Convolutional neural network (CNN)
Residual neural network (RNN)
Highway network
Mamba
Autoencoder
Variational autoencoder (VAE)
Generative adversarial network (GAN)
Graph neural network (GNN)
Category
MusicBrainz
