Title: Labeled data
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labeled_data
PageID: 54033657
Categories: Category:Machine learning
Source: Wikipedia (CC BY-SA 4.0).

-----
Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Semi-supervised learning
Self-supervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Meta-learning
Online learning
Batch learning
Curriculum learning
Rule-based learning
Neuro-symbolic AI
Neuromorphic engineering
Quantum machine learning
Classification
Generative modeling
Regression
Clustering
Dimensionality reduction
Density estimation
Anomaly detection
Data cleaning
AutoML
Association rules
Semantic analysis
Structured prediction
Feature engineering
Feature learning
Learning to rank
Grammar induction
Ontology learning
Multimodal learning
Apprenticeship learning
Decision trees
Ensembles Bagging Boosting Random forest
Bagging
Boosting
Random forest
k -NN
Linear regression
Naive Bayes
Artificial neural networks
Logistic regression
Perceptron
Relevance vector machine (RVM)
Support vector machine (SVM)
BIRCH
CURE
Hierarchical
k -means
Fuzzy
Expectation–maximization (EM)
DBSCAN
OPTICS
Mean shift
Factor analysis
CCA
ICA
LDA
NMF
PCA
PGD
t-SNE
SDL
Graphical models Bayes net Conditional random field Hidden Markov
Bayes net
Conditional random field
Hidden Markov
RANSAC
k -NN
Local outlier factor
Isolation forest
Autoencoder
Deep learning
Feedforward neural network
Recurrent neural network LSTM GRU ESN reservoir computing
LSTM
GRU
ESN
reservoir computing
Boltzmann machine Restricted
Restricted
GAN
Diffusion model
SOM
Convolutional neural network U-Net LeNet AlexNet DeepDream
U-Net
LeNet
AlexNet
DeepDream
Neural field Neural radiance field Physics-informed neural networks
Neural radiance field
Physics-informed neural networks
Transformer Vision
Vision
Mamba
Spiking neural network
Memtransistor
Electrochemical RAM (ECRAM)
Q-learning
Policy gradient
SARSA
Temporal difference (TD)
Multi-agent Self-play
Self-play
Active learning
Crowdsourcing
Human-in-the-loop
Mechanistic interpretability
RLHF
Coefficient of determination
Confusion matrix
Learning curve
ROC curve
Kernel machines
Bias–variance tradeoff
Computational learning theory
Empirical risk minimization
Occam learning
PAC learning
Statistical learning
VC theory
Topological deep learning
AAAI
ECML PKDD
NeurIPS
ICML
ICLR
IJCAI
ML
JMLR
Glossary of artificial intelligence
List of datasets for machine-learning research List of datasets in computer vision and image processing
List of datasets in computer vision and image processing
Outline of machine learning
v
t
e
Labeled data is a group of samples that have been tagged with one or more labels. Labeling typically takes a set of unlabeled data and augments each piece of it with informative tags called judgments . For example, a data label might indicate whether a photo contains a horse or a cow, which words were uttered in an audio recording, what type of action is being performed in a video, what the topic of a news article is, what the overall sentiment of a tweet is, or whether a dot in an X-ray is a tumor.
Labels can be obtained by having humans make judgments about a given piece of unlabeled data. [ 1 ] Labeled data is significantly more expensive to obtain than the raw unlabeled data.
The quality of labeled data directly influences the performance of supervised machine learning models in operation, as these models learn from the provided labels. [ 2 ]
Crowdsourced labeled data
In 2006, Fei-Fei Li , the co-director of the Stanford Human-Centered AI Institute, initiated research to improve the artificial intelligence models and algorithms for image recognition by significantly enlarging the training data . The researchers downloaded millions of images from the World Wide Web and a team of undergraduates started to apply labels for objects to each image. In 2007, Li outsourced the data labeling work on Amazon Mechanical Turk , an online marketplace for digital piece work . The 3.2 million images that were labeled by more than 49,000 workers formed the basis for ImageNet , one of the largest hand-labeled database for outline of object recognition . [ 3 ]
Automated data labelling
After obtaining a labeled dataset, machine learning models can be applied to the data so that new unlabeled data can be presented to the model and a likely label can be guessed or predicted for that piece of unlabeled data. [ 4 ]
Challenges
Data-driven bias
Algorithmic decision-making is subject to programmer-driven bias as well as data-driven bias. Training data that relies on bias labeled data will result in prejudices and omissions in a predictive model , despite the machine learning algorithm being legitimate. The labeled data used to train a specific machine learning algorithm needs to be a statistically representative sample to not bias the results. [ 5 ] For example, in facial recognition systems underrepresented groups are subsequently often misclassified if the labeled data available to train has not been representative of the population,. In 2018, a study by Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru demonstrated that two facial analysis datasets that have been used to train facial recognition algorithms, IJB-A and Adience, are composed of 79.6% and 86.2% lighter skinned humans respectively. [ 6 ]
Human error and inconsistency
Human annotators are prone to errors and biases when labeling data. This can lead to inconsistent labels and affect the quality of the data set. The inconsistency can affect the machine learning model's ability to generalize well. [ 7 ]
Domain expertise
Certain fields, such as legal document analysis or medical imaging , require annotators with specialized domain knowledge. Without the expertise, the annotations or labeled data may be inaccurate, negatively impacting the machine learning model's performance in a real-world scenario. [ 8 ]
References
