Title: Proaftn
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proaftn
PageID: 30992863
Categories: Category:Machine learning, Category:Statistical classification
Source: Wikipedia (CC BY-SA 4.0).

-----
Proaftn is a fuzzy classification method that belongs to the class of supervised learning algorithms . The acronym Proaftn stands for: (PROcédure d'Affectation Floue pour la problématique du Tri Nominal), which means in English: Fuzzy Assignment Procedure for Nominal Sorting .
The method enables to determine the fuzzy indifference relations by generalizing the indices (concordance and discordance) used in the ELECTRE III method. [ 1 ] To determine the fuzzy indifference relations, PROAFTN uses the general scheme of the discretization technique described in, [ 2 ] that establishes a set of pre-classified cases called a training set.
To resolve the classification problems, Proaftn proceeds by the following stages: [ 3 ]
Stage 1. Modeling of classes: In this stage, the prototypes of the classes are conceived using the two following steps:
Step 1. Structuring: The prototypes and their parameters (thresholds, weights, etc.) are established using the available knowledge given by the expert.
Step 2. Validation: We use one of the two following techniques in order to validate or adjust the parameters obtained in the first step through the assignment  examples known as a training set.
Direct technique: It consists in adjusting the parameters through the training set and with the expert intervention.
Indirect technique: It consists in fitting the parameters without the expert intervention as used in machine learning approaches. [ 4 ] [ 5 ]
In multicriteria classification problem, the indirect technique is known as preference disaggregation analysis . [ 6 ] This technique requires less cognitive effort than the former technique; it uses an automatic method to determine the optimal parameters, which minimize the classification errors.
Furthermore, several heuristics and metaheuristics were used to learn the multicriteria classification method Proaftn. [ 7 ] [ 8 ]
Stage 2. Assignment: After conceiving the prototypes, Proaftn proceeds to assign the new objects to specific classes.
References
External links
Site dedicated to the sorting problematic of MCDA
