Title: Nature Machine Intelligence
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nature_Machine_Intelligence
PageID: 59973182
Categories: Category:Academic journals established in 2019, Category:Artificial intelligence journals, Category:Computer science journal stubs, Category:English-language journals, Category:Machine learning, Category:Machine learning stubs, Category:Nature Research academic journals
Source: Wikipedia (CC BY-SA 4.0).

-----
Nature Machine Intelligence is a monthly peer-reviewed scientific journal published by Nature Portfolio covering machine learning and artificial intelligence . The editor-in-chief is Liesbeth Venema. [ 1 ]
History
The journal was created in response to the machine learning explosion of the 2010s. It launched in January 2019, and its opening was met with controversy and boycotts within the machine learning research community due to opposition to Nature publishing the journal as closed access. [ 2 ] To address this issue, now Nature Machine Intelligence gives authors an option to publish open access papers for an additional fee, [ 3 ] and "authors remain owners of the research reported, and the code and data supporting the main findings of an article should be openly available. Moreover, preprints are allowed, in fact encouraged, and a link to the preprint can be added below the abstract, visible to all readers." [ 4 ]
Abstracting and indexing
According to the Journal Citation Reports , the journal has a 2021 impact factor of 25.898, ranking it 1st out of 144 journals in the category "Computer Science, Artificial intelligence" [ 5 ] and first out of 113 journals in the category "Computer Science, Interdisciplinary Applications". [ 6 ]
References
External links
Official website
This article about a computer science journal is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
See tips for writing articles about academic journals . Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page .
v
t
e
This machine learning -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .
v
t
e
